# Gurren Translation
This repository is for the tool used to translate the game. If you're looking for the English patch, click [here](http://www.romhacking.net/translations/5846/).  
## Setup
Install [Python 3](https://www.python.org/downloads/).  
Download [NerdFontTerminatoR.exe](https://github.com/pleonex/NerdFontTerminatoR/releases).  
Download this repository by downloading and extracting it, or cloning it.  
Copy the original Japanese rom into the same folder and rename it as `gurren.nds`.  
Run `run_windows.bat` (for Windows) or `run_bash` (for OSX/Linux) to run the tool.  
## Font Editing
Edit `font.png`, the needed bigrams will be automatically generated by the repacker.  
More symbols can be added by editing the `fontconfig.txt` file.  
Custom full-glyphs can also be added, and then used with the syntax CUS(NAME) in strings. NAME must be 4 characters long.  
## Text Editing
Rename the \*\_output.txt files to \*\_input.txt (bin_output.txt to bin_input.txt, etc) and add translations for each line after the "=" sign.  
New textboxes can be added by appending `>>` followed by the new text.  
Control codes are specified as `<XX>` or `UNK(XXXX)`, they should usually be kept. Line breaks are specified as `|` or `<0A>` depending on the file.  
To blank out a line, use a single `!`. If just left empty, the line will be left untranslated.  
Comments can be added at the end of lines by using `#`.  
If a line is missing mouth flaps on the sprite, it can be fixed by adding `[XX]` at the beginning of the line. The code needed is different for every character and can be found by analyzing a script file (`tool analyze SCRIPT_NAME.SPC`) with proper mouth flaps for the same bust sprite, 5 bytes before the speech line.  
## Image Editing
Rename the out\_\* folders to work\_\* (out_KPC to work_KPC, etc).  
Edit the images in the work folder(s). The palette on the right should be followed but the repacker will try to approximate other colors to the closest one.  
If an image doesn't require repacking, it should be deleted from the work folder.  
## Animation Editing
To add `x` frames to an animation, use the following command:
`tool expand --n x FILENAME.YCE`  
This will copy the YCE file to the work_YCE folder after adding x frames of animation (the last frame will be copied).  
After this, you can extract YCE again and this will update the data for the next repacks.  
## Scripts Testing
The `--deb` parameter can be used while repacking to send the player to the Debug Map when starting a new game.  
The `--force <script>` parameter can be used while repacking to run a particular script when starting a new game.  
## Run from command line
This is not recommended if you're not familiar with Python and the command line.  
After following the Setup section, run `pipenv sync` to install dependencies.  
Run `pipenv run python tool.py extract` to extract everything, and `pipenv run python tool.py repack` to repack.  
You can use switches like `pipenv run python tool.py repack --bin` to only repack certain parts to speed up the process.  
